The marble figurines are the masterpieces of Cycladic Art and some of the most preliminary representations of human form.  All figurines were made of marble, a material which existed in abundance in most Cycladic islands."Observing carefully the individual characteristics of the female figurines, the breasts, the pubic triangle, the slightly swollen abdomen, we understand the importance of the role of women which is associated with fertility and reproduction. The special place of woman is also confirmed by the fact that 90% of the figurines are females.  This figurine could represent a woman in a state of pregnancy, or a deity connected with the fertility of nature. The marble figurines are the masterpieces of Cycladic Art and some of the most preliminary representations of human form. The almost planar, marble forms characterized by simplicity and harmonious proportions, impressed and inspired artists such as Brancusi, Modigliani and others at the beginning of the 20th century. Through their works of art, these artists reintroduced the Cycladic figurines to the public and made them popular.
Who was the creator of the figurine? Α man and more specifically a marble sculptor. This kind of sculptor was someone who knew the processing of marble well. All figurines were made of marble, a material which existed in abundance in most Cycladic islands. This female figurine is of the canonical type, is representative of the Dokathismata variety and attributed to the “Ashmolean Museum Master”. The “Ashmolean Museum Master” was named after the museum in Oxford, where his largest known work is displayed. This sculptor is credited with a small group of figurines of the Dokathisma variety, whose slightly distended abdomen is thought to indicate a state of pregnancy. The incised V on the neck, the shield-shaped head, the pointed nose and the joined legs are some of the sculptor's main features. These figurines are characterized by the harmony of their proportions, the angular contours and the high degree of meticulousness shown by the sculptor in the rendering of the individual details.
Were the creators of the figurines only men? We cannot interpret the different roles of men and women with certainty, as no written texts or depictions of that time have survived. While female figurines are depicted with folded arms, in a passive position, male figurines depict men in movement or with characteristics which denote a role. The figurines of hunters, warriors, musicians and others are representative examples of this.
Which were the roles of men and women in the Early Cycladic society? Distinct gender roles have always existed in society from the prehistoric era to our contemporary world. Although it is not easy to make assumptions on the role that women and men held in the Early Cycladic society, we can assume that women and men held different but important roles. More information on the different roles of men and women emerged during the Historic Period. Women had an important role within their households and oversaw the raising of their children. They only left the house to participate in burial customs and certain religious rituals. Men had an active role in public life. They could hold office, become warriors, skilled craftsmen, or athletes and therefore prominent members of the society. Women were not part of social life and men enjoyed celebrations and symposia with other men. During celebrations, it was usual for men to express their admiration for each other publicly. Bonding and sharing of activities referred to men of the same class. Written evidence and representations on clay vessels are the main sources of information on daily life and the role of men and women in society as potters decorated the vessels with scenes from aristocrats' everyday life and habits.
Where is this exhibit located? What about the Museum? The Museum of Cycladic Art was founded in 1986 in order to host the archeological collection of Nikolaos and Aikaterini (Dolly) Goulandris with works of Cycladic and Ancient Greek Art.  Currently, the collections are organized in four thematic units. The presentation of the collections is setup in contemporary style, with the use of interactive media in the permanent collections (which are accessible by people with hearing loss while the Cycladic Exhibition is accessible by people with hearing loss and people with blindness): Cycladic Art, Ancient Greek Art – A Story with Images, Cyprus – Ancient Art and Culture, Scenes of Everyday Life in Antiquity.  This exhibit is part of the Cycladic Exhibition. The Museum's Cycladic Exhibition reflects the splendor of a civilization that flourished during the 3rd millennium BC and, with the simple and austere lines of its art, defined the esthetics of 20th and 21st century artists. Representative examples of the world-famous Cycladic figurines, as well as vases made of marble and clay and bronze tools, unite the past and present of people who carved, worshipped, hunted, feasted, and raised their eyes to the starry sky of the Aegean.
Why is this artwork at this museum?  The permanent exhibitions of the Museum of Cycladic Art house objects that tell the stories of people from the Prehistoric to the early Byzantine period. The Exhibition of Cycladic Art inextricably linked to the Museum since its formation, is one of the most complete private collections of Cycladic Art in the world. Marble figurines, vases made of marble and clay, and bronze tools shed light on the civilization that flourished in the 3rd millennium BC, inviting every visitor to look back in time and see what defined and inspired him/her. The Museum's Exhibition of Ancient Greek Art traces a journey through time focusing on the indelible socio-political developments, such as the emergence of the first palatial structures of Minoan Crete and Mycenaean Greece, the birth of the ancient city, the emergence of democracy and the creation of the first Mediterranean empires, while the Exhibition of Cypriot Antiquities of Thanos N. Zintilis, one of the largest and most important collections in the world, tells through its numerous objects the story of an island civilization that combined Aegean, Egyptian and the Near Eastern influences in its art.

Through the Stories of the Museum of Cycladic Art, various aspects of the Cyclades’ prehistory are presented and as well as those of the everyday life of the islanders, who lived on the islands during the 3rd millennium BC, are explored. A wide range of activities of the archipelago’ s early societies, such as the art of marble carving, the settlements, the environment and navigation, make up a culture whose anthropocentric character had a profound influence even on Modernist artists!


The function and meaning of the cycladic figurines. The meaning and function of Cycladic figurines is somewhat of an enigma. In the absence of written records, any interpretation has to be based exclusively on archaeological finds and reasonable assumptions. Unfortunately, the archaeological data is insufficient due to the extensive looting that took place on the Cycladic islands in the 1950s and 1960s, which was the result of the increased value of marble figurines in the international art market during that period. It has been estimated that out of approximately 1400 known figurines, only 40% of them were recovered through systematic excavation. Even with such incomplete data, however, it is clear that–leaving aside the unique case of Keros–most Cycladic figurines come from graves. This has led many scholars to associate them with funerary rituals, although the theories proposed vary considerably.

Geography of the cyclades. The Cyclades are a group of small islands in the south-central part of the Aegean Sea that form a virtual land bridge between mainland Greece and Asia Minor. Naxos, with an area of 428 square kilometers, is the largest island. The name, Cyclades, was used by Herodotus, Thucydides, and several other ancient authors. According to Strabo, the Cyclades included the islands of Keos, Kythnos, Seriphos, Melos, Siphnos, Kimolos, Paros, Naxos, Syros, Mykonos, Tenos, and Andros – all of which formed a circle around the sacred island of Delos. Thera, Ios, Sikinos, Pholegandros, Amorgos, Anaphi, and some of the modern Dodecanese were included in the southern Sporades. We should remember, however, that the earliest recorded use of the term Cyclades dates to the 5th c. BC. Therefore, we cannot know what the inhabitants of the Cyclades in the 3rd millennium BC – who left no written evidence – named their islands.

The human form in cycladic art. Marble figurines are the most impressive creations of Cycladic culture, and Cycladic figurines of the Early Cycladic period fall into two main categories: schematic and naturalistic. The most common type of schematic category – characteristic to the Early Cycladic I period (3200 – 2800 BC) – is the violin-shaped figurine. The name refers to the shape, and we know that such figurines represent females. These figurines are usually small – rarely exceeding 15-20 centimeters. Other than the schematic figurines, we have several examples of artifacts that depict the human form in a more naturalistic way. The naturalistic figurines of this period include, for example, the so-called Plastiras type (named after the homonymous Early Cycladic cemetery on Paros).

The use of colour in cycladic art. Cycladic craftsmen made extensive use of colors in their creations, either for practical or for symbolic purposes. Traces of colour have been preserved on a wide variety of artifacts – namely marble figurines and vessels, clay vases, and bone tools. A detailed study of such uses of colour is possible through traditional methods, chemical analysis, and ultra-violet photography. Red and blue were the most common colours used by Cycladic artists; green and black were also used, but less frequently. All colors were produced from different natural minerals, such as:
Red from iron oxides (hematite), red ochre, or cinnabar (mercury sulfide – which is not native to the Aegean and was probably imported from Asia Minor or the Balkans) Blue from azurite (copper carbonate) Green from malachite or hydroxide of azurite Black was probably produced by the oxidization of another mineral, possibly azurite

Manufacture of cycladic figurines. Female figurine of the canonical type, representative of the Dokathismata variety, attributed to the “Ashmolean Museum Master”. The triangular head is dominated by a long aquiline nose. The angular shoulders are curved slightly downwards. The chest is rendered in relief, while the hands are folded on the belly. The slightly distended abdomen probably symbolized a state of pregnancy. The figurine consists of one of the most elegant and flowing forms of Early Cycladic sculpture. The strict geometric structure, the harmonious proportions and the abstraction of the figurine epitomize the virtues that made Cycladic art a source of inspiration for important twentieth-century artists.

How were the figurines made? Existing studies suggest that an experienced craftsperson would have needed 20-30 hours to carve a flat piece of marble into a small figurine (up to 25 cm in height), using simple tools made of hard stones (such as emery or obsidian). That said, we do not know how long it took to sculpt the larger figurines. Our understanding of how the Cycladic figurines were made derives from three sources: a) A workshop area found at the site of Skarkos (on the island of Ios), which contained finished and half-finished figurines, tools of emery, obsidian, and pumice ­– as well as lumps of mineral pigments b) Toolmarks on half-finished figurines c) Experimental manufacture of marble figurines with traditional tools and techniques.

Date: 2300-2000 BC
Type of object: Figurine
Measurement: H. 39.1 cm
Maker: Unknown
Materials and techniques: Marble
Location: Museum of Cycladic Art
Link: https://cycladic.gr/en/exhibit/ng0206-ginaikio-idolio-parallagis-dokathismaton
Validated by: Cycladic Museum - Nefeli Bantela