The Guild chest.

Guild chests were usually very richly decorated and elaborately crafted, and formed the centrepiece and symbol of every craft guild. When members gathered, if the guild was in session the chest was placed on a table and ceremoniously opened to announce that the meeting was about to begin. An open guild chest was a sign that they should behave decently, maintain a respectful silence and observe clear rules. The chests contained the guild privileges, the craft regulations, the master records, journeymen’s books, the admission book, logs and important documents. They also held the guild treasury, which was funded with dues paid by masters and journeymen and also fines for all kinds of breaches of the guild rules. These violations included spilling large amounts of wine, cursing or gambling in front of an open guild chest. Even excused absences from meetings would incur a penalty. The privileges and the craft regulations were read out at every meeting to remind members of their rights and duties. Apprentices were admitted to the guild in an initiation ceremony, which took place in front of an open chest. They vowed before the chest that they would complete their apprenticeship faithfully and properly, not run away, follow the guild rules and keep the secrets of the guild. The chests often had multiple locks, so that they could only be opened with the keys of several different guild officials. Guild meetings, which were centred around the guild chest, were usually held four times a year.

Crafts and exchange.

In medieval Central, Western and Northern Europe, craft trades played an essential role. The prosperity of the towns depended on their revenue. During the High Middle Ages, groups of craftsmen came together to form self-governing associations in a cooperative arrangement – the guilds. Their members included master craftsmen, journeymen and apprentices. These craft associations not only had the authority to ensure that duties, rights and quality were maintained, but also provided social support, for example when members fell into hardship through no fault of their own. They worked to prevent competition and keep order between guild members. Guilds had their own customs, greetings and even a special language. On completion of the apprenticeship and their ‘absolution’, young craftsmen had to set off on their wanderings as a journeyman. The journeyman would spend three years travelling around, during which time he was not allowed to come within 50 km of his home town. These wanderings introduced him to new working practices, foreign places and regions, as well as new styles used elsewhere. They also brought him the advantages of forging new relationships and learning all kinds of traditional or new techniques from various masters. Journeymen became familiar with other customs and traditions and gained life experience in the process. The wanderings of the journeyman (known as the Walz) is a custom that is still practised voluntarily today. In 2014 it was included in UNESCO’s list of intangible cultural heritage.

The Guild Chest of the Gingerbread Bakers.

The Lebzelter were known for their honey gingerbread. They were gingerbread bakers, but also mead makers and chandlers. They traded in honey, processed it and produced mead and beeswax candles as well as their popular gingerbread. Some gingerbread makers even had their own tavern licence allowing them to sell honey wine. The particularly rich ornamentation on the guild chest of the Graz gingerbread bakers points to a certain level of prosperity among the guild members. A sign of the guild is also found on their chest – it is decorated with a beehive inlaid in the wood and a metal emblem. Because of the high commercial value of honey, the craft of the gingerbread bakers was lucrative in the Middle Ages. It was only after sugar began to be extracted from sugar beets that the gingerbread bakers lost their status and their trade was replaced by the sugar bakers. The tradition of gingerbread making, which merged with the craft of the Austrian confectioners, has been listed as UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage since 2022.

The museum was founded in 1928 and is today placed in the Palais Khuenburg in the center of Graz. It represents the city, its residents, the history of the city and includes urbanistic views. The Graz Museum also includes the Graz City Archive, the City Archaeological Centre and the Graz Museum Schlossberg. The museum currently has around 50 employees.

The guild chest is part of the object collection of the Graz Museum and is labelled as storage furniture. The original object is shown at the permanent exhibition “The Story of Graz” and is placed in the room which represents the period between 1600 and 1806.

As the guild chests were important elements of the guilds, this chest is representative of the many guilds that existed in Graz. As the guilds played an important role in Graz's city life, they are relevant for the history of the city and therefore also for the City Museum of Graz. The chest ultimately had the function of a storage furniture for important documents. The wooden chest is decorated with inlaid woodwork. This technique was used to attach a view of the city of Graz to the lid of the chest. There are not only metal handles on the sides of the chest for carrying it around, but also smaller metal ornaments and two metal locks on the front.
There is also an inscription written on top of the chest with the following text: ”Guild chest of the bourgeois master gingerbread bakers of Graz and the whole province of Styria. Anno 1605. Renovated 1906-1934.”

1. The Beehives of the Gingerbread Bakers. The beehive symbolises honey – the most important resource for the gingerbread bakers’ craft. Honey was a key ingredient of the gingerbread baked in the Middle Ages. Before sugar was industrially produced from sugar cane, honey was essential for sweetening food. In the 19th century, sugar bakers gradually replaced the craft of the gingerbread makers by using cheap beet sugar, among other things.
2. Crafts in the City (Graz). Crafts played an important role from the Middle Ages on, especially in cities and market towns. Urban politics was dominated by trade and craft affairs. Many cities in northern, western and central Europe have a rich history of crafts, including Graz. Traces of medieval Graz can still be seen today, especially in the inner city. Here there was a range of skilled trades that included butchers, bakers, shoemakers, tailors, barbers and barber-surgeons, blacksmiths, millers, master builders, masons, carpenters and glaziers.
3. Important Documents and Secret Discussions. Guild chests were usually secured by several locks. The chest was intended to be opened collectively and only with the keys of chosen representatives, since the contents of the chests were valuable. The most important documents of each guild as well as the guild treasury were kept inside. The treasury was partly funded by fines for breaches of the rules. For example, a member had to pay a penalty if he divulged what had been discussed at meetings, which were held in front of an open guild chest.
The Collection of the Graz Museum is very heterogeneous in terms of its inventory and its creation. It has not been compiled in a targeted manner, but rather has grown through donations, collections and acquisitions. In many cases, its growth was driven by special exhibitions. In recent years, a collection strategy has been developed with the aim of sharpening the collection profile, further expanding strengths and closing gaps. During the last new inventory of the collection from 2005 to the end of 2006, more than 100,000 objects were registered and entered in a database. In the course of this, the stock was divided into 15 collections. These are self-contained collections of pharmacy items, militaria, theatre and music collections and collections of books, photographs, archives, postcards, graphics, paintings, furniture, coins and medals, objects, plans and sculptures classified according to materiality. The unifying theme of the objects in the collection is their connection to the city of Graz and its population.

Trade Guild Chest artwork is part of the permanent exhibition The Story of Graz.
The permanent exhibition of the GrazMuseum “The Story of Graz” illustrates the development of the Styrian state capital from the Middle Ages to 2003 from a both local and European perspective.
The conflict history of the genesis of the city, its demographic development, gender issues, and the transforming appearance of Graz are combined with present-day issues such as globalisation, migration, diversity, or urban codetermination and transport policy. By extending the permanent exhibition The Story of Graz into the digital space, the Graz Museum meets its goal of being a contemporary history museum for all people.  The digital offer follows the exhibition from the supposed first mention of Graz in 1128 to 2003, the year when Graz was European Capital of Culture. Emphases on the themes of Project of the City, Images of the City, Diversity and Gender Roles enable differentiated viewing: Who shaped the city and the urban community, to whom was it open, who made history and what enters commemorative culture? As a platform of the vibrant history and of lived openness of the Graz Museum, the digital content of The Story of Graz will grow continuously. In this way, new possibilities for exploring the history of the city of Graz keep emerging.
The Diligence of Bees and Citizens.
The rich decor of the Gingerbread Baker’s Chest bears witness to the wealth of the guild members, their self-image and their self-confidence. On the chest’s lid there is a view of the city of Graz, inside we see the Holy Trinity. The chest was used for storing important documents such as, for example, the Crafts Code, which was established by Ferdinand II in 1597 and was confirmed several times—most recently by Maria Theresia. The gingerbread bakers worked with and traded in honey. They made candles of beeswax and a special right to brew mead, which secured them a profitable additional income.
Date: 1744
Measurement: height 49 × width 60 x depth 39 cm
Maker: Unknown
Materials and techniques: Inlaid wood
Subject:craftsmanship, crafts, guilds, trade, ginger bread bakers, intangible cultural heritage, craftsman, journeyman, wandering, Walz, Middle Ages, apprenticeship, knowledge sharing, exchange, honey, ginger bread
Type of object: Depository furniture
Location: Graz Museum
Link: https://360.grazmuseum.at/en/objects/innungstruhe-der-grazer-lebzelter/    https://collection.reinherit-hub.eu/#object=184    https://reinherit-hub.eu/exhibitions/craftmanship/CraftmanshipObjects/CraftmanshipObjThree/
Validated by: Catalin Betz - Graz Museum