White lekythoi were clay vessels used for the storage of aromatic oils. They first appeared at ca. 470 BC. and they were used exclusively for funerary purposes until 400 BC. In this lekythos, a veiled female figure approaches a grave holding a basket filled with offerings. The scene is watched by a young man, probably the dead. Lekythoi were produced in ceramic workshops located in the Kerameikos area, in Athens. In Attica, the soil was suitable (clay soil or clay) and a great amount of vessels of exceptional quality were constructed. For the potter to construct the lekythos, he first moulded the vessel on the wheel.The grip was constructed separately and later attached to the vessel. Following that, the potter coated the surface of the vessel with a very fine slip of white clay (kaolin) as a base for the painter to design the iconography. Firing was the last stage of construction. Most contemporary ceramics are constructed on electric wheels and are decorated with glazed colours, burned in the kiln, glazed and fired for a second time. Today there are contemporary potters that continue to observe ancient techniques and incorporate them into their practice. With little variation, pottery is an art which has survived from antiquity to today. It is considered an object of study for experimental arch archaeology.

Why is this artwork in this museum? The white lekythos is part of Ancient Greek Art exhibition of the Museum of Cycladic Art. The Exhibition of Ancient Greek Art – entitled A History in Images – is presented on the second floor of the Permanent Exhibitions of the Museum of Cycladic Art. Ancient Greek Art is one of the most important phenomena of world culture and has decisively contributed to the shaping of the modern Western world’s character and aesthetics. This long period saw major social and political developments, including the rise of the Greek city-states, the establishment of democracy, and the appearance of the first Mediterranean empires. Each of these developments left its own imprint on art, producing images that reflect different social values and ideologies. The Ancient Greek Art exhibition attempts to explore the social aspects of ancient art and link the changes of artistic expression in the Aegean to important historical developments. Therefore, the Exhibition of Ancient Greek Art examines the importance of the development of the first cities and great sanctuaries in the 8th century BC, the development of iconography, the emerging contacts with the East and the subsequent adoption of new techniques and methods of representation in the early Archaic period, the contribution of art to the development of specific social and ideological models in classical times, and the widespread economy’s impact on the art of the Hellenistic period. Through this kind of presentation, visitors are invited to confront ancient Greek art, not as a fossil, but as a dynamic product of the society it served and a living medium of expression that interpreted, commented on, and even reshaped social reality. The Museum's Exhibition of Ancient Greek Art reflects in its objects a broad chronological period (from the 2nd millennium BC to the 4th century AD), reviving important milestones in ancient Greek history, such as the birth of the ancient Greek city and the emergence of democracy. Sculptures, clay and bronze vases, figurines, jewellery, helmets, coins, narrate in a comprehensible way the long journey of man through time. White lekythos (oil or perfume vase) attributed to the Woman Painter. A female figure wearing a peplos (body-length garment) is depicted bringing offerings to a grave. The funerary monument is in the form of a column set on a three-stepped base and crowned by an Ionic capital and acanthus leaves. Behind the female figure stands a diphros (stool), while a headdress and a mirror are suspended in the background wall. A young man who wears a purple chlamys, high boots on his feet, a brimmed hat (petasos) thrown on his back and a spear in his hand is represented on the other side of the funerary monument.

White lekythoi appeared around 470 BC and continued to be produced exclusively for funerary use until 400 BC. The white ground was achieved by coating the surface of the vases with a very fine slip of white clay (with kaolin), which took on the distinctive hue after firing. The male figure is represented in the type of the “peripolos”, i.e. that of a lightly armed young man serving his military duties in the border areas of Attica. The iconography of white lekythoi provides important information about the funerary monuments of the period, particularly the stelai and the columns that marked the graves. Most of the lekythoi with funerary scenes show relatives of the deceased visiting the grave. The women carry in large panniers the objects necessary for the funerary cult, such as unguentaria, fillets, wreaths etc. Sometimes, figures were depicted beside the grave, watching the events. These figures probably represent the deceased. The Woman Painter to whom the illustrated lekythos is attributed was so named by modern scholars for the beauty of the women depicted on his vases. He probably specialised in the decoration of white lekythoi, as his works known at present are all vases of this type. White lekythoi seem to be his favourite shape, since all surviving vases attributed to him are of this type.

Date: around 420 BC 
Type of object: Pottery
Measurement: H. 28.8 cm
Maker: Unknown
Materials and techniques: Clay
Location: Museum of Cycladic Art
Link: https://cycladic.gr/en/exhibit/kp0102-leuki-likithos
Validated by: Cycladic Museum - Nefeli Bantela